GIBSON RESEARCH CORPORATION	http://www.GRC.com/

SERIES:		Security Now!
EPISODE:	#83
DATE:		March 15, 2007
TITLE:		UAC in Depth
SPEAKERS:	Steve Gibson & Leo Laporte
SOURCE FILE:	http://media.GRC.com/sn/SN-083.mp3
FILE ARCHIVE:	http://www.GRC.com/securitynow.htm

DESCRIPTION:  Steve and Leo wrap up their quest to get Windows Wi-Fi to 'Maintain Full Radio Silence' by adding one additional important tweak to Windows settings.  Then they discuss the detailed security implications, now and in the future, of Vista魹ｽs new and powerful user account control (UAC) system.

INTRO:  Netcasts you love, from people you trust.  This is魹ｽTWiT.

LEO LAPORTE:  Bandwidth for Security Now! is provided by AOL魹ｽRadio at AOL.com/podcasting.

This is Security Now! with Steve Gibson, Episode 83 for March 15, 2007:  Vista魹ｽs UAC.

Security Now! is brought to you by Astaro, makers of the Astaro Security Gateway, on the web at www.astaro.com.  And by Nerds On Site.  Looking to grow your IT service business?魹ｽ魹ｽFind out how Nerds On Site can help.  Visit Iwanttobeanerd.com.

Time for Security Now!, our favorite security podcast.  Well, frankly, my only security podcast.  But it魹ｽs still my favorite.  And my favorite security guru is here, that魹ｽs for sure, and that魹ｽs Mr. Steve Gibson from GRC.com.  Hi, Steve.

STEVE GIBSON:  Hey, Leo, great to be back with you.

LEO:  We are, of course, going to talk about something new in a moment.  Actually I魹ｽm very excited about this, the user access control, the UAC feature in Vista, and whether it really does protect you.  But before we get to that, do you have anything from previous episodes you魹ｽd like to...

STEVE:  Believe or not, yes.  We魹ｽve basically snuck in an魹ｽentire show on maintaining full radio silence on Windows魹ｽWiFi.

LEO:  Well, it started when we were talking about this Free Public Wi-Fi that pops up on Windows from time to time, and what it was, and how now Microsoft has offered a fix but never told anybody about it, and you have to explicitly download it.  That魹ｽs what we talked about last week.  And if you didn魹ｽt hear last week魹ｽs episode, you should absolutely download that update.

STEVE:  Right.  So that was our second mention.  Then the week before, Episode 81, we talked about 魹ｽ we actually showed the dialogues required to turn off the functionality, just sort of this promiscuous connect-to-anything-that-I-hear, and also this idea of broadcasting the names of any networks you had connected to before, which by default Windows tries to do.  It turns out that it魹ｽs trying to do that still, even after you魹ｽve got the update, because Microsoft added a checkbox to one of the configuration dialogues which is checked by default, and you have to go turn it off.  So here in our fourth serialized How to Get  Wi-Fi Just to Shut Up, we have additional instructions.  People can, if they go to the show notes for this Episode魹ｽ83, I魹ｽve got a link back to the new and enhanced instructions that are over now on Episode 81魹ｽs notes.  So Episode 81魹ｽs show notes are enhanced with this additional information, and this episode links back to those.

LEO:  So this is if you installed the patch that Microsoft offered in November to fix wireless zero config, it魹ｽs still promiscuous unless you uncheck this box.

STEVE:  Yes.  There魹ｽs a box which enables it to connect to networks which are not broadcasting.  And so if the networks are not broadcasting, then your computer does.  And it魹ｽs just like, okay...

LEO:  Is this ad hoc only?  Or is it infrastructure networks, as well?

STEVE:  It魹ｽs both.  And so anyway, the idea is 魹ｽ in fact, I realized, okay, I started using the term 魹ｽmaintaining full radio silence.魹ｽ

LEO:  Yeah, that魹ｽs a good way to talk about it, yeah.

STEVE:  As the famous jargon.  And that魹ｽs what we want.  We want to be able to carry a laptop around.  If we forget to disable our Wi-Fi, we don魹ｽt want it sending out stuff of any sort.  We want full radio silence.  And so it turns out that following the instructions that are now on the show notes for 81, with the update which we talked about in 82, which we魹ｽre all pulling together now in 83, when we first opened the topic in 80, we basically snuck in a whole Security Now! episode on maintaining full radio silence for...

LEO:  I should just take those chunks and edit them together, and we魹ｽd have Episode 84 ready to go.

STEVE:  And then the other news is, we had a second Tuesday of the month with no major Windows security updates.

LEO:  Wow.  Now, that doesn魹ｽt mean there were no major Windows security flaws, we魹ｽve learned.  And often Microsoft will just say, well, a patch isn魹ｽt ready, or we魹ｽre not going to elect to ship it out.  As I remember, I saw that in fact there were several critical flaws in XP, at least, that Microsoft wasn魹ｽt ready to patch yet.  So those flaws are still there.  Presumably it魹ｽll be patched next Tuesday.  But I don魹ｽt think anybody has said there are any flaws in Vista.  And that魹ｽs actually very encouraging news.

STEVE:  Well, and I don魹ｽt think they魹ｽll be patched next Tuesday because 魹ｽ oh, you meant...

LEO:  Next month.

STEVE:  ...next Patch Tuesday, right.

LEO:  Yeah, Microsoft魹ｽs doing it the second Tuesday of every month now.  Unless there魹ｽs something really serious going on, and sometimes they魹ｽll do a quick patch.

STEVE:  And of course several times, I guess it was last year, we saw them do that, where they would catch up.  They said, okay, this will not wait for our standard monthly cycle.  We魹ｽve got to get this done now.

LEO:  Well, I have to say, and we魹ｽre going to talk about it today, a little bit about Windows Vista security.  But I am encouraged.  Vista魹ｽs been out now officially for more than a month, almost a couple of months, and I haven魹ｽt seen any major exploits.  Of course people have been attacking the Windows authentication.  But I don魹ｽt care about that so魹ｽmuch.

STEVE:  Well, in fact, I think it was on one of your other podcasts you were talking about 魹ｽ or it might have been Diggnation.  Anyway, so one of these podcasts I heard mention that there was now a tool that would generate valid keys for installing Vista, and that it was possible that somebody else could come along with a correct key which Microsoft would say, oh, I魹ｽm afraid that魹ｽs already been used.  You can魹ｽt use that key.

LEO:  Yeah.  I魹ｽll update you on that.  We were talking about that on Windows Weekly.

STEVE:  You and Paul, yeah.

LEO:  It turns out that was a scam, bogus.  It was phony.  And the people who claimed to have actual keys generated by this thing were either lying 魹ｽ and the guy who wrote it admitted it.  He said, you know what, 25 characters, a mix of alpha and numeric, too big for any brute-force key cracker to solve.  So I lied to you.  However, that doesn魹ｽt mean that the hacks don魹ｽt continue.  There魹ｽs now a BIOS hack to disable authentication.  So the hackers go on trying to crack into Windows Vista.  And everything I魹ｽve heard about this latest one is that it does, in fact, work.  And it doesn魹ｽt have that really 魹ｽ somebody pointed out that this key cracker, if it had worked, wouldn魹ｽt be stealing from Microsoft, it would be stealing from other users because you魹ｽd be coming up with a serial number that these other users might in fact legitimately have.

STEVE:  Right.

LEO:  Anyway, that魹ｽs where the hacking seems to be going on.  But so far I haven魹ｽt heard 魹ｽ I don魹ｽt know, have you? 魹ｽ of any exploits against Vista, which is very encouraging.

STEVE:  Well, okay, yes.  It魹ｽs encouraging.  But it魹ｽs also predictable.  For example, we know that so many problems we had with Windows 2000, well, certainly 95, 98, Windows 2000, I don魹ｽt even want to talk about ME, and even XP were due to the fact that Microsoft just seemed so slow about getting a clue about how to make a Windows system safe on the 魹ｽNet.  All you have to do is have a firewall.  And as we know, XP had it, but it was disabled by default.  Finally, with Service Pack 2, they turned it on.  It魹ｽs funny, I魹ｽm seeing this pattern, and I魹ｽm recognizing, though, what the pattern means.  The pattern is a means for sort of slowly but surely creeping forward with good security.

LEO:  Hallelujah.

STEVE:  Yes.  And this actually feeds directly into today魹ｽs topic because I spent a lot of time researching something that I promised that we would talk about because I knew there was a lot there, and that魹ｽs the UAC, the user account control.  Because it魹ｽs more than just the annoying dialogue that pops up.  There魹ｽs a ton of stuff going on back there.  And when I look at what Microsoft had to do to implement the solutions they have, I can understand why Vista took so long.  Even though they threw out all the other goodies that they were promising to have in so-called 魹ｽLonghorn,魹ｽ which was the backroom codename for a long time, there魹ｽs really a lot there.

But, for example, Vista of course maintains XP Service Pack魹ｽ2魹ｽs default enabling of the firewall.  Well, that means that you don魹ｽt have this problem of open ports that we魹ｽve always had until, well, a router would be in front.  That would be a solution.  But obviously lots of people several years ago during all of the worms on the 魹ｽNet, they didn魹ｽt yet have home routers.  And in fact, I don魹ｽt know at the time whether we were yet promoting the idea of a router as an affirmative hardware security measure.  I think still then we were talking about software firewalls.  So certainly people who added software firewalls to their system or made sure XP魹ｽs disabled-by-default firewall was enabled, they were much more secure.

Well, finally we got that built in with Service Pack 2.  And魹ｽessentially that whole set of problems is resolved now.  That魹ｽs just not going to be a problem.  But what魹ｽs interesting to me is that this is sort of the trend that we see with Microsoft, where new, better technology is put in, but it魹ｽs not enabled initially, sort of because they want to warn everyone, this is coming.

LEO:  Right.  They don魹ｽt want to break everything, but they魹ｽdo want to implement it.  So they give you a little魹ｽheadsup.

STEVE:  And a perfect example, we魹ｽve talked of course extensively about hardware DEP, data execution prevention, that I魹ｽm so bullish about, which now exists both in XP and being given a lot more attention in Vista.  What I魹ｽve seen as I魹ｽve looked at it more is, for example, a very popular image-viewing program called IrfanView, it turns out it won魹ｽt run with DEP turned on.  It魹ｽs because it uses an EXE packer, an executable compression program called ASPack.  And it makes sense that it wouldn魹ｽt because naturally an executable compressor has got to decompress the executable, so it allocates a bunch of data memory into which it decompresses the compressed executable, and then it runs it.  Well, it魹ｽs running a data allocation, which is exactly what DEP is designed to stop.  On the other hand, UPX, which is actually the leading and most popular EXE compressor, it魹ｽs DEP-compatible because those guys realized, hey, when we allocate this memory, we should mark the pages as executable.  In which case, DEP has no problem with it.  So that魹ｽs a great example of how a program might stumble over DEP, but how it魹ｽs also possible to do the same thing in a DEP-friendly fashion.

LEO:  Now, why doesn魹ｽt a hacker just mark his pages executable and avoid the problem himself?

STEVE:  Well, because he魹ｽs got to be running in order to mark them.

LEO:  So he can魹ｽt run the code until he can run the code.

STEVE:  Exactly.  Exactly.  So it魹ｽs the perfect example.  And in fact we see this a lot.  For example, when Vista pops up the user account control screen, the whole screen darkens, and you get this highlighted dialogue that you have to say Continue or Cancel on in order to allow this permission or not.  Well, it魹ｽs been noted that malware could fake that screen in order to get users to type in administrative credentials.  And so from that standpoint it sort of represents an Achilles heel of user account control because with user account control you魹ｽre constantly, if you魹ｽre not running as an admin user, you魹ｽre constantly having to type in your admin credentials to prove that you have admin rights that are just you魹ｽre not flexing those muscles right now, which raises the exposure of those credentials.  But then the counterpoint to that is, well, yes, but malware has to be running in your system in order to allow it to spoof user account control.  And what user account control prevents is the inadvertent installation of malware in the first place.

LEO:  Hey, before we get too far into the discussion of user account control, because I魹ｽm very interested in this, should we pause for a station break?

STEVE:  Sure.

LEO:  And we魹ｽll get back to it in just a second.  But I do want to mention our sponsors since we are talking about security.  Astaro Security Gateway魹ｽs Version 7 has come out.  And, man, what a major update.  I mean, a lot of neat new features you魹ｽre going to take a look at.  Of course you know the Astaro Security Gateway is a device that runs software that gives you a complete solution, soup to nuts, for security.  I mean, everything from VPN to hacking intrusion detection.  You get email security, antivirus, antispyware, you get web filtering, you get spam protection, all of that in an easy-to-use device; and all, of course, the network protection stuff that you魹ｽd expect.  But now with Version 7 there魹ｽs some new features 魹ｽ a centralized email encryption strategy, which means you get email encryption and decryption at the device instead of at the desktop, so your users, it魹ｽs completely transparent for them.  A great way to implement S/MIME or OpenPGP standards.  It now has SSL on VPN, yay.  Scaleable via clustering so you can get as many as ten Astaro Security Gateways working together to really give you, without load balancing, to really give you some powerful growth capabilities.

And this is the thing for home users that I魹ｽm very excited about.  In the past you魹ｽve always offered the Astaro Security Gateway software so you could put it on your own beige box machine.  It魹ｽs an open source distribution.  And in the past, what they魹ｽve done is they魹ｽve charged you 79 euros, and you魹ｽd have a subscription to all the other features 魹ｽ the web filtering, the spam, the updates for the antivirus and the antispyware.  Well, they魹ｽve waived that subscription fee if you魹ｽre ten users or ten IP addresses and up to a thousand concurrent connections.  So for home users it魹ｽs now completely free for all of the goodies Astaro can offer.  This is really a great deal.

If you want to know more about Astaro, visit their website, Astaro.com, or call 877-4AS-TARO, and they魹ｽll schedule a free trial of an Astaro Security Gateway in your business.  We thank Astaro for their support of Security Now!.

So some people complain sometimes about that user account control screen, the fact that it魹ｽs a separate screen.  For instance, I notice some programs don魹ｽt work.  I use a program called Synergy that allows me to share my mouse and keyboard over the network.  And it魹ｽs befuddled by that screen.  I guess that魹ｽs also to defeat some hacking.

STEVE:  Yes.  In fact, it魹ｽs much more going on there than meets the eye.  Let me finish with sort of the concept that I was...

LEO:  I魹ｽm sorry, I didn魹ｽt mean to interrupt you.

STEVE:  No, it魹ｽs fine.  Irfan of IrfanView fame is now under tremendous pressure to get IrfanView to be compatible with DEP.  So even though it魹ｽs disabled by default, some early adopters, like all the people we魹ｽre preaching to, are turning DEP on.  They魹ｽre discovering IrfanView is incompatible.  They魹ｽre sending him support email saying, hey, this doesn魹ｽt work.

LEO:  Something he could fix easily, I魹ｽm sure.

STEVE:  And it魹ｽs funny because I saw 魹ｽ someone forwarded me his response.  And I魹ｽm not sure what his native language is, but it was pretty clear it魹ｽs not English.  And he was like, what魹ｽs going on?  All of a sudden everyone魹ｽs complaining about this.  And I魹ｽm thinking, well, can you say Security Now! and the importance of turning on hardware DEP?

So this is an exactly analogous thing to certainly what happened back in the early days of software firewalls.  Early adopters who were security conscious turned this on.  And they were the people who were aware enough to understand sort of the UI complexity and sort of the downside of being an early adopter.  They put pressure on anything that was incompatible to get it fixed.  So essentially the way was paved for Microsoft then to come along later and do a firewall built into Windows that would just be able to be turned on.

So similarly, here Microsoft has DEP.  And thanks to us bringing it to attention, and of course with Vista魹ｽs increased security, there is now pressure on developers of applications which are not DEP-friendly to fix that.  So what I can absolutely foresee is that some point in the future DEP will be enabled by default.  But it won魹ｽt be until all of the early adopters have put pressure on applications and sort of moved incompatibility from more of the, well, yeah, that魹ｽs another problem so it魹ｽs not worth turning DEP on, we魹ｽve essentially moved it to where DEP-incompatible or unfriendly programs are enough in the minority that it魹ｽs sort of more their fault for being un-DEP-friendly rather than expected.

And as we talk here about user account control, there魹ｽs all kinds of aspects of what Microsoft has done in Vista which, as I have explored it, I魹ｽve come to the conclusion that, slow as Microsoft is 魹ｽ glacial, in fact 魹ｽ in moving, it魹ｽs very clear to me with Vista that they really got it.  I mean, the light finally lit up and said security is the big deal.  We have got to resolve this.  And this was essentially Jim Allchin魹ｽs final gift to Microsoft.  He was there for 17 years, and he resigned the moment Vista went out the door.  He said, I am done.  Because he was the head of this project with a long, deep career in networking and understanding this stuff.

And what we end up with is essentially a system which throughout the system it魹ｽs putting pressure on developers.  It魹ｽs doing it gently, just as the existence of DEP does, sort of in the background.  But there is pressure nonetheless.  A perfect example is what you were just saying about how people are upset or complaining about this UAC, the user account control permission dialogue popping up so much.  It turns out that an application developer can completely control that so that it isn魹ｽt popping up when it魹ｽs not necessary.  But by default, unless you mark your application as UAC-aware, then Microsoft falls back to the default behavior of essentially popping it up too much because your application hasn魹ｽt provided the granularity which is available in Windows.

A perfect example is my little SecurAble app that I wrote a couple months ago.  I made it Vista-compatible by specifically appending what魹ｽs called an 魹ｽapplication manifest魹ｽ to the executable to declare that this thing needs administrative privileges.  Because, as we魹ｽll remember, I am installing explicitly, briefly I魹ｽm installing a kernel driver in order to access the chipset魹ｽs hardware directly in order to get underneath any disabling that the BIOS or Windows may have done.  I want to actually see what the hardware is telling me.  The only way to do that is from ring 0 in the kernel.  So SecurAble announced right upfront, hey, I魹ｽm going to need admin privileges.  So anyone attempting to run SecurAble in Vista is immediately presented with this UAC dialogue.

Well, it would be possible, and Microsoft provides complete documentation, for making that more granular so that, for example, you could run SecurAble, and if there were more to it, basically you run SecurAble and it simply shows you the results, so there was no UI process to go through, which is why I have that dialogue, the user account control dialogue presented right upfront.  But, for example, it魹ｽs very possible for a more complex application not to show you that dialogue until you actually do something that will, in that user interface event, will need those kind of privileges.  A perfect example is setting the clock.  If you look under Vista at just the standard old clock setting dialogue, the button that you have to push to change the time has a little shield on it.  That shield over time will come to be associated in users魹ｽ minds with, oh, this is user account control.  So Microsoft has designed an icon which can be attached to buttons, just to sort of show users, if you push this, we魹ｽre going to ask you.  And so it creates a little bit of sort of interactivity, even pre-pushing interactivity, because the user can adopt the expectation that they魹ｽre going to be asked for credentials if they魹ｽre logged in as an admin user.

So the idea is that all of these things, they put pressure on the developers.  Your application can be more friendly if you do the following things.  Well, in the process it is substantially more secure also.  And so what魹ｽll happen is, this behavior will end up over time pervading applications which become Vista-aware.  And so this whole notion of needing admin privileges will be diminished.

The other thing is that, because now even people running as admin users are being prompted to confirm, again, the application experience is the motivation that developers have to minimize their use of admin privileges.  It turns out Microsoft魹ｽs analysis of many applications showed them that most apps really don魹ｽt even need admin privileges.  It魹ｽs just they were inexpertly, or I should say casually, written so that, well, you know, what the heck.  I魹ｽm running as an admin.  We know most users run as an admin.  So we won魹ｽt pay much attention to that.

Well, thanks to Vista not even running admins as admins, which I魹ｽll talk about in a second, it turns out that all applications which were sort of assuming admin privilege even when they didn魹ｽt need it, they魹ｽre now popping up these dialogues which can be easily prevented just by having the developer pay more attention to whether admin privileges are really necessary or not.  And just that simple, this little bit of pressure is going to end up changing the experience.  It魹ｽs going to make applications more friendly under Vista by essentially never showing this user account control dialogue because there was a little pressure on the application writers to do the right thing.

LEO:  So by default the application, if the application writer doesn魹ｽt do anything, opts for the highest level of魹ｽsecurity, just assumes that you have no access to do魹ｽanything.

STEVE:  Well, yes.  And Microsoft recognizes that there are apps, old apps, for example, that are no longer being maintained.  Companies have gone out of business.  You still want to be able to run those securely.  So if the application doesn魹ｽt identify itself as being Vista-aware, then Microsoft defaults to the behavior we魹ｽre seeing from most existing applications at Vista launch time, which is this is a lot in your face...

LEO:  It魹ｽs not too bad.  I have to say it isn魹ｽt too bad.  I think, though, that really it does respond to a problem that I魹ｽve seen in both XP and Windows 2000 of applications not running at all if you魹ｽre not an admin.

STEVE:  Yes.  And in fact that was what SecurAble was doing.  When I was first running SecurAble, it was failing silently.  And I thought, wait a minute, that魹ｽs not good.  So it didn魹ｽt have admin privileges.  And rather than asking for them, I was performing some calls.  What Microsoft has done is a little bit of a problem because they are silently failing some low-level calls without letting the application know that this thing it tried to do didn魹ｽt work.  I guess they魹ｽre trying to be a little bit tricky or clever in order to prevent malware from knowing that something it wanted to do hasn魹ｽt happened.

There are many layers to this.  They魹ｽve got something called UIPI, the user interface privilege isolation, which is another new thing in Vista.  We魹ｽve never had it before.  It魹ｽs, again, really a long time in coming, but will do a lot to enhance desktop security.  The idea is that they魹ｽve added a new abstraction for applications called 魹ｽintegrity levels.魹ｽ  You can have low, medium, high, or system integrity.  And many things that go on in terms of the system communication depend upon the level of integrity.  For example, a lower integrity process cannot validate a window handle, which is something that goes on in the API of a process with higher integrity.  You cannot send it a message or post a message to a process with a higher integrity level.  There are other things that hackers often do known as attaching a thread or a journal hook to an application, and injecting DLLs is a common means for sticking one of your own DLLs into a privileged application and getting it to run there.  All these things were fundamental, I mean, long-standing, fundamental, serious security problems in Windows.

So Microsoft is sort of inching forward.  They couldn魹ｽt turn that stuff off because it would break too many things.  So they said okay, let魹ｽs create a new abstraction, this notion of how much we trust applications.  And so, for example, Internet Explorer runs at the lowest level of integrity, as does email applications, because they魹ｽre communicating, and they魹ｽre more potential vectors for trouble.  So those programs have absolutely no need to be reaching out and touching other applications on the desktop.  But by default Windows was designed, for example a macro recorder could attach to another process and send it keystrokes.  That魹ｽs how macro recorders and macro playback operates is you魹ｽre able to sort of send messages to a program as if you were the user typing things or clicking the mouse.  Well, malware魹ｽis able to do that also in order to cause obviously malicious things to happen.  So this longstanding behavior, again, Microsoft is slowly tightening the screws on this saying, wait a minute, for things that we don魹ｽt trust as much, we魹ｽre going to limit their ability to access other魹ｽprograms.

Well, now, this will break some things.  Microsoft is unable, as we魹ｽve seen, for example, with the kernel patch protection, they魹ｽre unable to simply shut down all kernel modification in 32-bit Windows as they have for 64.  So they魹ｽre saying, look, we魹ｽre going to be really resistant to this kind of behavior and sort of try to moderate how much they push back.  But what魹ｽs very clear as you look at what Microsoft has done throughout Windows Vista is there is finally some real pushback from the OS onto applications, saying, look, it魹ｽs time for us all to clean up our act.  It魹ｽs time for us to start behaving ourselves.  And you can read the handwriting on the wall that this is going to be increasingly enforced over time until eventually, Leo, I can say, I can foresee the time when Windows ends up being the most secure operating system around.

LEO:  What I魹ｽm really hearing you say actually explains a lot.  People like Chris Pirillo who have decided to go back, they don魹ｽt want to use Vista, they魹ｽre going back to XP because so much stuff doesn魹ｽt work, what they魹ｽre really running up against is what we魹ｽve always said all along.  It魹ｽs a tradeoff, security for convenience and security for compatibility.  And in a way it魹ｽs encouraging to me that Vista is not compatible with some of these applications.  It can魹ｽt be if it wants to be secure.

STEVE:  Well, yes.  And in fact we also hear 魹ｽ I did a lot of research.  I魹ｽve heard, in fact, even our friend Joanna Rutkowska, who created the Blue Pill system, she魹ｽs poked around at UAC some.  And she commented that initially, well, first of all, one of her main systems she魹ｽs using all the time is Vista.  She魹ｽs moved over to it.  And she was seeing that she was getting the UAC pop up a lot initially, and that it quieted down.  It stopped being a problem.  And so I think it魹ｽs clear that it魹ｽs also a function of what kind of user you are.  Certainly Chris is a power user.  He魹ｽs installing things all the time.  He魹ｽs experimenting with stuff.  He魹ｽs a different profile than your typical, buy a new Dell laptop at Circuit City and basically take it home and plug it in and don魹ｽt do anything with it because it魹ｽs got all the stuff in it already that you need.

LEO:  Well, and that魹ｽs what I魹ｽve been saying.  If you魹ｽre getting a new computer, and you don魹ｽt have legacy hardware and software, absolutely go with Vista.  And if you魹ｽre not, if you魹ｽre upgrading, you might want to wait just because of these compatibility issues.

STEVE:  Well, again, for myself, I魹ｽm happy at XP.  And I also saw...

LEO:  Well, you were happy at 2000 until about a month ago.

STEVE:  That魹ｽs true.

LEO:  In fact, you still run 2000, don魹ｽt you.

STEVE:  In fact, I魹ｽm sitting in front of 2000.  I was a little annoyed that Microsoft chose not to update the time zone change during our recent daylight savings time shift.  Windows 2000 is still under their critical care, whatever the heck they call it, where major security things get fixed, but non-important things don魹ｽt get fixed.  Which they could have easily done, but I think it魹ｽs some pressure from Microsoft to say, okay, they魹ｽre not telling me to move forward, but they魹ｽre telling the industry it魹ｽs time to start moving away from Windows 2000.

LEO:  Although there魹ｽs no technical reason.  All that daylight savings time update is simply changing a setting for when summertime begins.  There魹ｽs no need to vet that or test it.  It魹ｽs just push it out.  So it魹ｽs very blatantly, if you ask me, commercial pressure to upgrade, for no good technical reasons.

STEVE:  I think that魹ｽs clearly what was going on.  But again, just to make sure I made myself clear, I could see Chris backing away from Vista and essentially allowing other people to get the arrows in their backs and essentially solve these problems.  It makes sense to wait for applications to mature for the Vista environment.

As I really came to understand, as I looked at what was going on here, I realized, you know, these are deep changes.  When we talked about the incompatibility you experience with remote control of the secure desktop, it is explicitly the case that the secure desktop, even though it sort of just looks like the desktop got dim and a dialogue was allowed to run, sort of like in the foreground, what魹ｽs actually happening is that desktop bitmap is copied, and the desktop is switched to a secure environment where nothing but system code is able to have any contact with that desktop.  So application code, which is normally what you have running, for example, keystroke macro recorders and playback and so forth, that are using Windows hooks in order to control applications remotely, and certain keyboard and mouse remoting, those things lose 魹ｽ they have no connection to this secure desktop.  And the reason Microsoft did this is they wanted to prevent obviously malware from clicking Continue before the user is able to click Cancel if this has been presented by malware trying to install itself.  So it really is a substantial change.

Now, Joanna, in examining this user account control stuff, she spotted something which really annoyed her, which was in order for Microsoft not to break installers, they魹ｽve done this bizarre stuff, Leo.  Literally, if you run any program that contains the word 魹ｽinstall魹ｽ or 魹ｽsetup魹ｽ or 魹ｽupdate魹ｽ in the filename, Vista looks at the filename, the executable filename.  And if it has 魹ｽinstall魹ｽ or 魹ｽsetup魹ｽ or 魹ｽupdate魹ｽ or many other things, like specific vendors or company names, product names, keywords in the executable, specific strings in the environment, any of these things will trigger Vista to decide you魹ｽre running an installer which should have admin privileges.

LEO:  Now, it魹ｽs funny because I don魹ｽt expect a hacker to put the word 魹ｽsetup,魹ｽ 魹ｽupdate,魹ｽ 魹ｽinstall魹ｽ into their software, or even name it such.  Do you?

STEVE:  Well, again, it魹ｽs a perfect door for a trojan to basically trick somebody into running a trojan program.

LEO:  Oh, you make it look like a standard installer, of course, yeah.

STEVE:  Exactly.  And essentially, for anything that looks like an installer, Vista completely drops its guard.  And Joanna魹ｽs complaint was anything with those words in the name, for example, can install drivers in the kernel.  And so it魹ｽs like, well, okay, but that魹ｽs what a setup program may need to do.  It may need to legitimately install drivers in the kernel.  And so I guess Microsoft魹ｽs response again is, well, wait a minute, we asked you if you wanted to run this program.  So we魹ｽve prevented it from happening behind your back, and that魹ｽs the whole point, is we魹ｽre going to prompt you to make sure this is what you want to do.

And again, it魹ｽs Microsoft fighting the need to not break old things while waiting for them to catch up.  For example, once all the installers and installer systems around have been caught up, Microsoft can quietly back off on this sort of flaky heuristic approach to solving the problems of the past and, again, putting more pressure on these things to update in order for those programs to identify themselves as installers that explicitly need admin privileges in order to魹ｽrun.  So essentially I魹ｽm very impressed with what Microsoft has done.  Even, you know, we魹ｽve also commented how even users who do run Vista as an admin, your typical I-don魹ｽt-need-no-stinking-limited-account guys, even they...

LEO:  And that魹ｽs the default, by the way, it encourages you to make a user account, but it doesn魹ｽt require it.

STEVE:  Actually the way it works by default, Leo, is the first account you create is one of these sort of limited admin accounts.  Successive accounts are user accounts.

LEO:  Right, users, right.

STEVE:  By default.  So...

LEO:  And most people just create one account, though, that魹ｽs my point.  And that account will be an admin account.

STEVE:  Yes, it will.  Now, what魹ｽs interesting, though, is at log-on, two separate tokens, two separate privilege tokens are actually created by the operating system.  It creates a privileged user, but it also creates what they call a filtered standard user.  And that魹ｽs what everything you do runs under.

LEO:  So you really aren魹ｽt running as an admin, even if you魹ｽre running as an admin.

STEVE:  Yes, that is what魹ｽs so cool.  And it魹ｽs one of the things that I didn魹ｽt understand is that you absolutely are not running with admin privileges.  Even when you log on as an administrator, you get this filtered, limited, standard user token.  And that魹ｽs the privilege under which Explorer.exe, not Internet Explorer, Explorer.exe, the main desktop shell, which is the parent process for everything else you do, that is running as a standard user.  And it魹ｽs called a filtered token because what happens is Windows is watching for things asking this token for heightened privileges.  And so the more privileged admin token, the real admin token, does still exist.  And that魹ｽs what Windows will switch to if you satisfy it by saying, yes, I want to proceed with installing whatever it is you魹ｽre doing.  But by default, even an admin user under Vista is running as a standard user.

LEO:  Do you know of any attempts to hack UAC to get around it?  It sounds like UAC provides a very good barrier.  But of course, with any barrier, it might be possible to just ignore it to get around it.

STEVE:  Well, and certainly that is the attack surface that we can imagine hackers will be going after.

LEO:  They魹ｽre not going to go straight in.  They魹ｽre going to have to go around.

STEVE:  Exactly.  One of the things that I have seen as I魹ｽve looked at what Microsoft has done is that all the things that all of us have known have always been wrong with Windows, they have fixed.  This notion of the too easy inter-application communications, well, they魹ｽve created this integrity level concept to mitigate that threat and to prevent DLL injection.  While still not breaking it completely, they魹ｽve made it less accessible.  And certainly data execution prevention, and the address space layout randomization, ASLR, to make things load in unknown, uncertain locations to prevent hackers from being able to jump to code at known fixed locations in the system.

I mean, basically they魹ｽve sat back, and they魹ｽve looked at everything wrong.  And with Windows Vista they said, okay, we can魹ｽt just lock down on this because things will break.  But we魹ｽre going to make it very clear that we are in the process of locking down on these things.  Which is why I魹ｽm so encouraged.  I mean, as you know, I魹ｽve been very rough on Microsoft historically about their lack of care and lack of concern.  I was pulling my hair out with raw sockets, and for so long they kept running with no firewall enabled and active exploitable services, open ports exposed to the Internet.  Those things are fixed.

What Vista represents is a major psychological mindset change about where Windows is going.  I魹ｽm not surprised that Chris Pirillo has backed off from it because it魹ｽs so new.  What he魹ｽs feeling is he魹ｽs feeling that pressure.  I expect that three or four years from now it魹ｽll be a much 魹ｽ when I魹ｽm ready to move to it, it魹ｽll be a much better experience because that pressure will have rippled backwards through the application community; and application providers, wanting their stuff just to work seamlessly, they will have fixed things to be Vista-compatible.  And in the meantime I魹ｽm happy with XP.

LEO:  Now, let me ask a question, because a couple of podcasts ago you were worried about Vista魹ｽs virgin stack, that completely rewritten stack that at least in beta was making some mistakes that had been fixed in earlier versions of Windows.  Any evidence that the stack is providing a魹ｽweakness?

STEVE:  Well, it魹ｽs not providing a static weakness, by which魹ｽI mean because of the firewall in front of it there魹ｽs no access to it.  There is still the problem that, once you魹ｽve got a connection opened, there could be some packet-level connectivity problems.  But we haven魹ｽt heard of anything yet.  I wouldn魹ｽt be surprised if we end up with some funky way that a malicious server could send you bad packets.  The problem is, they couldn魹ｽt be unsolicited.  They have to be solicited.  And so that魹ｽs a much lower attack surface than what we saw before, for example, with UNIX, with no firewall running by default and just all these services running in the very early days of the UNIX stack, where all these exploits and mistakes were first being made.  So Microsoft, even though they魹ｽve got this unproven stack, which worries魹ｽme, it魹ｽs much less easy to get access to it from the魹ｽoutside.

LEO:  Well, I have to say I魹ｽm excited.  And I魹ｽve been very happy running Vista both in emulation on my Mac and on at least one of my PCs.  I can魹ｽt run it on another one because Adobe Audition does not work with Vista, and it doesn魹ｽt seem to have any timeline when it will.  Somebody told me that...

STEVE:  Well, and you know, Leo, it totally makes sense, too.  Because as we know, Vista completely revamps the whole audio subsystem in order to add DRM.

LEO:  I魹ｽm sure it魹ｽs a major thing to rewrite.  And it魹ｽs based on old code, Cool Edit Pro.  So I have a feeling that maybe, in fact, some have indicated that perhaps Adobe won魹ｽt even do an Audition for Vista, but just start a whole new application like Soundbooth from scratch.

We do want to thank right now our great friends at Nerds On Site who are celebrating, I魹ｽm sad to say, their last episode with Security Now!.  If you are a nerd, they need nerds to service their customers.  Visit Iwanttobeanerd.com.  Nerds On Site are looking for nerds with all competencies and skills from PC and Mac experts to specialties like Siskel 魹ｽ not Siskel, Cisco, Siskel魹ｽs a movie reviewer 魹ｽ and Oracle.  Actually I think I combined Cisco and Oracle to make one thing.  You name it, they need it.  Fix-it technicians, web designers, programmers, project managers, even you could be a sales nerd, a trainer, a security expert like Steve.  Antivirus gurus, the list goes on.

They especially love nerds who like to troubleshoot, tear apart, and rebuild their own systems in their spare time.  Nerds are independent contractors.  You魹ｽre in business for yourself, but not by yourself.  And that魹ｽs what魹ｽs so cool about Nerds On Site.  You could focus on your passion and not the burdens of running a business.  All over the world, seven countries, 256 different competencies and that University of Nerdology.  Visit Iwanttobeanerd.com and register for a nerds-only meeting in your area today.  Great people.  We really are glad that they stopped off and spent some time with us on Security Now!.  We wish them all the best in the future.  Iwanttobeanerd.com.

Boy, I have a feeling Microsoft is going to want to publish this podcast on their website.  If you go to GRC.com, Microsoft, you get a transcript.  You can also 魹ｽ everybody can do that.  A 16KB version for the bandwidth-impaired.  I know Bill Gates doesn魹ｽt yet have broadband, so maybe you want to go to GRC.com.  That魹ｽs also where Steve stores all his great security programs like the new SecurAble, DCOMbobulator, UnPlug n魹ｽ Pray, and of course ShieldsUP.  Have you crossed 50 million users yet?

STEVE:  No, but we魹ｽre approaching that.  That魹ｽs going to be a big event.

LEO:  We魹ｽll do a party, yeah.  GRC.com.  And of course that魹ｽs where SpinRite lives, too, everybody魹ｽs favorite, my favorite disk recovery and maintenance utility.  If you魹ｽve got a hard drive, you need SpinRite at GRC.com.  Next week it魹ｽs question-and-answer time.

STEVE:  We魹ｽll do a dozen of our listeners魹ｽ questions and answers.  And to answer the question that they ask, how to send that, you go to GRC.com/securitynow.  That brings up our main and growing Security Now! page.  Scroll all the way to the bottom, and there魹ｽs a web form.  Just fill it out.  You can put a name and tell us whereabouts you魹ｽre calling from, click the Send button to post it to me, I魹ｽll receive it, and we魹ｽll get to it.

LEO:  Next week.  Thank you, Steve.

Copyright (c) 2007 by Steve Gibson and Leo Laporte. SOME RIGHTS RESERVED.  This work is licensed for the good of the Internet Community under the Creative Commons License v2.5. See the following Web page for details: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.5/
