GIBSON RESEARCH CORPORATION		https://www.GRC.com/

SERIES:		Security Now!
EPISODE:	#1066
DATE:		February 24, 2026
TITLE:		Password Leakage
HOSTS:	Steve Gibson & Leo Laporte
SOURCE:	https://media.grc.com/sn/sn-1066.mp3
ARCHIVE:	https://www.grc.com/securitynow.htm

DESCRIPTION:  CAs warn us to urgently prepare for the inevitable.  Three U.S. states attempt to ban 3D printed firearms.  Denied ransom, ShinyHunters leaks 967,000 personal details.  "Billions" of U.S. Social Security numbers leaked.  Is Apple planning to add cameras to three new gadgets?  No more security fixes for Firefox on Windows 7 and 8.  Russia blocks the official Linux kernel site they need.  Will the U.S. "Freedom.gov" site post EU blocked content?  LLM's will offer secure passwords.  Do not use them.  As predicted, the "ClickFix" attack strategy takes over.  A listener believes his computer is compromised.  How could three popular password managers get things wrong?

SHOW TEASE:  It's time for Security Now!.  Steve Gibson is here.  We have a lot to talk about.  ShinyHunters said they have a lot of personal information from a company that was not going to pay the ransom.  Billions of U.S. Social Security numbers leaked.  How's that possible?  Apple adding cameras to its gadgets?  Is that a good idea?  And the U.S.'s new Freedom.gov website.  Plus we'll talk about that study that came out last week about password managers.  Are they secure?  TLDR.  Don't worry.  Hair not on fire.  But Steve will have the details next on Security Now!.

LEO LAPORTE:  This is Security Now! with Steve Gibson, Episode 1066, recorded Tuesday, February 24th, 2026:  Password Leakage.

It's time for Security Now!.  We wait all week for Tuesdays, but Tuesday has come.  Congratulations.  You made it.  Here's our hero of the day, Mr. Steve Gibson, our guru in security, privacy, and all of the above.  Hey, Steve.

STEVE GIBSON:  Leo, great to be with you again as we wrap up February and head into March.  We should explain to - I should explain to the 20,000-plus listeners whose email address I have, who have signed up for the weekly mailing, that they'll be getting a week's surprise this coming week because...

LEO:  Why?

STEVE:  Because you and I are going to be together in Florida on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday of next week.  So we're prerecording next week's Tuesday podcast on Sunday before the Sunday show, which means I will be working on it Friday and Saturday to get ready for Sunday.  And I'm apt to send it off to everybody Saturday afternoon.	

LEO:  Might as well, if it's done.

STEVE:  It's going to be done.  So, yeah.

LEO:  The upside of this is you're going to get two Security Nows next week because you're going to get the regular Security Now!.  We'll record on Sunday and release it as usual on Tuesday.  But then the presentation Steve's doing at Zero Trust World late Tuesday will also be put out as a special podcast.  So you're going to get - and actually that one's going to be really interesting, I think.  It's taking off on your - if you've listened to Security Now!, you understand his thesis that the real threat these days is coming from inside the building.

STEVE:  Yeah.  And it is the roughest thing to secure because you're telling your own employees, who are well meaning, that, sorry, we don't trust you.

LEO:  Right.

STEVE:  And it's like, we can't.  We don't even trust our own CEO.  He's going to press the wrong button.

LEO:  Guarantee you.

STEVE:  And sink the whole organization.

LEO:  Guarantee you that's the case.  Well, what else is coming up this week?

STEVE:  As promised, we're going to talk about what all that was about ETH Zurich and the deep analysis focused on three prominent password managers.  They made a point in their 28-page research document of saying that they did choose these because these were the three that had at least some of their client-side source available.  Of course we know in the case of Bitwarden all of the source is available.  But it's a point that I've made before, which is it just seems wrong that researchers are forced to first reverse engineer some product of some sort whose security they want to verify.  And then after going through all that work, then need to proceed to do the verification.  It's just like, guys, you know, we're asking a lot of them.  Anyway, I guess it's worth it because they do it.

So what I want to focus on is less the minutia of the details, because they've been fixed now, but the nature of the problem and why, while yes, they found problems, it never was like a pants-on-fire issue.  But mostly why there were problems.  What was the source of these problems?  Because isn't this supposed to be easy?  We'll talk about why it's not.

So I guess I'm going to start off by sharing a piece of email that I received last week that just made me look and go, really?  You're kidding me, where my Certificate Authority is warning me to prepare for the inevitable.  Which of course they brought about.  So, okay.  And then I'm going to drop this, I promise, for a while.  Although I will, I want to make sure that I don't forget to tell people that the five most downloaded pieces of freeware on GRC, on the freeware page, are now cosigned, not only with the original DigiCert EV certificate, but with that new one that I managed to finagle from IdenTrust.  I found a beautiful $72 HSM called SmartCard-HSM, which I'm very pleased with.  It's all supported by open source software.  I did struggle to get it all working.

And since I'm now not going to need to mess with it for three years, and I will promptly forget everything I just figured out, I'm going to spend some time to document the details of what I went through, and I will share that online.  So I know from all of the feedback that I've had from our listeners that there are many people out there who are interested in or need to do code signing.  And I've worked out I think a very flexible, powerful, and inexpensive path for doing that, having just done so myself.

LEO:  Good.  I can't wait to hear that.

STEVE:  This is a cute little thing, this little SmartCard-HSM, available internationally and actually locally.  They're here in Orange County, one of the retailers of them.  Anyway, so that's all done.  Then I also want to talk about another piece of lunacy that we're going to have fun with, Leo.  Three U.S. states are attempting to ban 3D-printed firearms by, once again, legislating it, even though, sorry, you can't get there from here.  That's not going to deter anybody.  It was triggered by the third state to join was - so it's Washington State, New York State, and then most recently California have decided, yeah, let's just not have those.  We don't want 3D printers to be able to print guns.  So we're just going to say you can't.

Also, denied their ransom, ShinyHunters has leaked just shy of a million - 967,000 - personal details online.  We'll touch on that.  Also, in a different report, billions, literally it said billions, of U.S. Social Security numbers have been leaked.  Only problem is some only like 400,000 or so have ever been created.  So I don't know how you have billions unless you have lots of duplicates.  Anyway, we'll look at that.  I wanted to touch on Apple planning to add cameras to three new gadgets.  Also, Firefox has hit another end-of-life event for Windows 7 and 8 and 8.1.

Russia made a mistake blocking some open source software that they themselves need.  And there's a weird site, Leo, Freedom.gov, which our government is planning to put out.  We'll talk about that.  And I'm interested in knowing from our European listeners whether they see something different than I do when I go to Freedom.gov here in Southern California.

Apparently LLMs will be happy to give you a password if you ask them.  Don't.

LEO:  Don't.

STEVE:  Don't ask them.

LEO:  Well, even if you ask it, don't use it.  That's, I think, more important.

STEVE:  Yeah, I mean, you can ask it.

LEO:  You can ask all you want.

STEVE:  We're going to talk about that.  Also, as predicted, that exploit that has had me so worried and upset, which is known as the ClickFix attack, turns out to be every bit as popular as I was worried it was going to be.  

We have a listener who was convinced, based on his NextDNS logs, that his computer had picked up a virus.  And based on what he shared with me, I agreed, until I looked more closely.  And then I had to smile when I saw what the cause was.  And then we're going to look at how could three popular password managers get things wrong?  So I think a good podcast...

LEO:  Wrong, wrong, wrong.

STEVE:  Wrong.  And then of course a Picture of the Week that everyone thinks, their first reaction is,  well, Photoshop?  Turns out apparently not.

LEO:  I haven't looked.  I shall look.  My eyes have been sealed.  All right.  Picture of the Week time.

STEVE:  So I gave this picture the caption, "But Officer..."

LEO:  All right.  Scrolling up.  I think we've seen this kind of thing before.  The impossible traffic sign.

STEVE:  It's like, what?  Yeah.  And okay.  So several of our listeners have taken it upon themselves to try to locate this actual, you know, geolocate where this was taken. The clue is there's a Tim...

LEO:  It looks like New England.

STEVE:  There's a Tim Horton's in the background.

LEO:  Oh, there you go.  Maybe it's Canada.  Ah.

STEVE:  Yeah, that's what I was thinking.  And someone did say that there had been some modifications to the street.  So, okay, so for those who can't see this, we're on a road, and this is one of our street sign pictures.  We're on a road approaching a T, where you must either, you know - and you can see there's a guardrail on the far sign of the intersecting road.  So you can't go straight.

LEO:  Can't go straight.

STEVE:  You've got to turn left or right.  Right?  Because you don't have a choice.  There's a stop sign there.  So, yes, certainly you'd want to stop before you made your choice.  The problem here is that up in front of all of that is one of the circle red slash signs.  Normally, you know, there would be like a right arrow with a slash through it, telling you that you cannot turn right.  Or maybe a left arrow, depending.  And you would expect that that would be reinforced with a one-way sign that you would also be confronting in the distance, just reminding you to, like, when you get to the stop sign, this is a one-way street.

LEO:  Well, there is only one way, and that's straight up.

STEVE:  Apparently.  Because the sign that we're looking at has both direction arrows red-slashed.  So you come up to this T intersection, and if you've paid attention to the sign that you had to pass in order to get there, it says you can't turn left.  You can't turn right.  And we know that because of a guard rail there, you can't go straight.  Thus, "But Officer..." when you get pulled over.

LEO:  But Officer.  But Officer.

STEVE:  Anyway, thank you.  Our listeners are sending these to me, and I do...

LEO:  Do we have any theory as to why this exists?

STEVE:  No.

LEO:  No.

STEVE:  No.  I mean, and as I said, the first thing you would think is that somebody Photoshopped it.

LEO:  Yeah.

STEVE:  I don't know why it was that someone said that was not the case.  What I heard, but it was just in passing as I was, like, scrolling through email, that there had been some changes made to the road.  Apparently they forgot to change the signage in order to stay synchronized.

LEO:  That makes sense.

STEVE:  Okay.  So I'm going to spend one more story on this, and then I'm going to leave it alone.  I want to do it because the amount of feedback I've received from a range of our listeners whose lives are impacted by Certificate Authorities one way or the other has been extensive.  The subject line of the email I received from DigiCert, my Certificate Authority, last Wednesday, okay, just made me shake my head.  The subject was, in the email:  "Urgent," it started off.  "Urgent:  Revalidate domains expiring February 24th due to new 199-day validity requirement."  Okay.

So here's what they wrote with great urgency:  "Dear Valued Customer.  We're reaching out with an urgent request to check your certificate domain validations before February 24th, 2026.  As we communicated in previous emails, February 24th" - and by the way, that's today; right?  Today we're recording this on February 24th.  "February 24th is the date when domain validation reuse periods will shorten to 199 days (down from 397 days) in accordance with the CA/Browser Forum's Ballot SC081v3.  Our records indicate that you or your subaccounts have existing domains that will expire on February 24th because of this change.  If your systems require immediate certificate issuance, your issuance could be delayed if you don't check and revalidate these domains before February 24.

"So what do you need to do?  DigiCert CertCentral" - because that's, you needed to get that registered - "now displays which of your current domains will expire on February 24th, 2026, due to the change to 199-day domain validation reuse periods.  Steps for revalidating domains that expire" - and then they go through, it's like, rigmarole of how to march through their user interface.  And then they finish with "We're here to help.  We understand industry-driven" - right, they had nothing to do with it, despite the fact that they're the biggest CA there is and voted for all this.  "We understand industry-driven compliance changes pose significant challenges, and we're standing by to assist you.  Please don't hesitate to contact your DigiCert account manager with any questions or concerns about the change to 199-day domain validation reuse periods.  Thank you for trusting us with your digital security.	 Signed, the DigiCert Team."

Okay.  So since DigiCert, a prominent, if not THE prominent voting member of the CA/Browser Forum, voted themselves to bring about these changes, it seems a little odd for them to be sympathizing with their customers over the inconvenience that these changes create.  To be straightforward, they would state that these changes have been made in the interest of improved security.  Okay.  We might disagree with that, as we know I do, but at least then they would be genuine.

What puzzled me in their note, which I read closely, was their statement that "Our records indicate that you or your subaccounts have existing domains that will expire," blah blah blah, "on February 24th."  As we know, it's never the case that anything is ever done that causes existing certificates to suddenly become invalid.  Right?  They said, "Your issuance could be, you know, your systems require immediate certificate issuance.  Your issuance could be delayed if you don't check and revalidate these domains before the 24th."

Again, as I was saying, it's never the case, thank goodness, that anything is ever done that causes existing certificates to suddenly become invalid.  You know, obviously revocation notwithstanding.  It's always the case that the "not valid after" date continues to be honored.  When you think about that, it's clear that a certificate that contains a built-in "not valid after" date means "valid until that date," and there's no way to "after the fact" have that no longer be true because it's bound into the certificate.  And this is why I went to all the trouble last week to establish a new code signing relationship with IdenTrust while three-year certificates were still allowed by the CA/Browser forum for code signing.

And as I mentioned at the top of the show, I am now the proud holder of a code signing certificate that will be valid until February of 2029, and nothing that happens between now and then, no matter what new insanity the CA/Browser Forum may enact, will change that.

So the answer to the mystery of what DigiCert means here is the phenomenon I spoke about last week, which is the new need, which they created, to decouple certificate "qualification" from certificate "issuance."  Since a certificate, once issued, will always live out the duration of its valid life unless it's revoked, back when certificates were issued for 10 or even five years, the qualification for that certificate was determined at the time of the certificate's issuance.  And what was all that - and that would be that.  That was it.  You verify that you quality.  Here's your 10-year certificate.  See you in 10 years.

But with the changes that are bringing about the shortening of certificate lifetimes, automation is effectively required.  And, you know, they're going to be seeing that more and more.  As we know, the industry intends to keep marching certificate lifetimes downward until they reach a maximum of 47 days in 2029.  We're about to drop to 200.  That's happening in the next week or two, to 200 days maximum.  Then it will be 100, where it holds for a couple years, then finally lands on 47 days.

So the "issuance" of Organization Validation certificates, which is what DigiCert produces, needed to be decoupled from the qualification to receive those.  Issuance decoupled from qualification.  Before the middle of next month, the CA/Browser Forum would allow organizations to go up to 825 days between qualification intervals.  So that's around 27 months before an organization needed to be re-validated.  But those 825 days now drops to 398 days, which is what DigiCert's letter was about.

They're saying that one or more of the validations that they performed for Gibson Research Corporation's identity occurred more than 398 days ago.  Until today, literally today, February 24th.  And that was just fine.  But as of today, February 24th, that's no longer true.  The validations that were valid yesterday are no longer valid today.  So anybody who would need to reissue a certificate soon needs to recognize that although they could have done so yesterday, they can't do so tomorrow.  Again, just craziness.  But that's the way this industry is being played.  So, you know, don't just go thinking that all you need to do is push a button to issue yourself a certificate.  Oh, no.  Your button has been disabled.  You no longer qualify until you've had the chance, you know, they, your authority have had the chance to look you up and down again, make sure you're still you.

And what's more, that will now be annual.  Oh, yes.  These wild times where you could go, well, yesterday, 825 days.  But once upon a time, five years, 10 years, no problem.  Those are over.  So this explains why once my previously paid certification with DigiCert is over in two years, I'll be happily dropping OV, these Organizational Verification Certificates, in favor of the much cleaner and simpler DV, Domain Validation certificates that Let's Encrypt's automation has been gleefully issuing now to the vast majority of the Internet to anyone who wishes to bring a server online.  So all we can do is go along with it because we have no control.

Okay.  So I know you were up to speed on this, Leo, because you reacted to it when I was saying I was going to talk about this.  We have another example of lawmakers apparently thinking "We don't know how you techies are going to do it, but that's not our problem.  We're going to make it a law so that it becomes your problem."  And I just wanted to point out, thanks to our listener Tom Minnick for bringing this little tidbit to my attention.  Tom sent a link to the reporting which appeared and was covered by the well-known and popular "Adafruit" website.  Adafruit (A-D-A-F-R-U-I-T), for those who may not be aware, is a highly regarded hobbyist/maker/hardware electronics website and retailer.  They posted the news of this new numbskull legislation under their headline:  "California's New Bill Requires DOJ-Approved 3D Printers That Report on Themselves."

So here's what Adafruit wrote.  They said:  "California's new bill requires Department of Justice-approved 3D printers that report on themselves targeting general-purpose machines.  Assembly Member Bauer-Kahan introduced AB-2047, the 'California Firearm Printing Prevention Act,' on February 17th."  So just recently.  "The bill would ban the sale or transfer of any 3D printer in California unless it appears on a state-maintained roster of pre-approved makes and models, certified by the U.S. Department of Justice as being equipped with 'firearm-blocking technology.'  Manufacturers would need to submit attestations for every make and model.  The DOJ would publish a list.  If your printer is not on the list by March 1st, 2029, it cannot be sold.  In addition, knowingly disabling or circumventing the blocking software would be a misdemeanor."

And it gets worse.  Much worse.  Okay.  Is everybody sitting down?  Adafruit continues:  "We've been tracking this pattern.  Washington State's HB 2321 requires printers to include 'blocking features' that cannot be defeated by users with 'significant technical skill.'"  Good luck with that on open-source firmware.  "New York's budget bill S.9005 buries similar requirements in Part C, sweeping in CNC mills and anything capable of 'subtractive manufacturing.'  California's version adds a certification bureaucracy on top:  state-approved platforms, state-approved software control processes, state-approved printer models, quarterly list updates, and civil penalties up to $25,000 per violation.

"As Michael Weinberg wrote after the New York and Washington proposals dropped, accurately identifying gun parts from geometry alone is incredibly difficult.  Desktop printers lack the processing power to run this kind of analysis, and the open-source firmware that runs most machines makes any blocking requirement trivially easy to bypass."

Okay.  So I'll interrupt to note again that, once again, when printers that can print weaponry are outlawed, only outlaws who wish to print weaponry will own outlaw printers.  Nothing will be accomplished to curtail the fact that a 3D printer can be used to print a dangerous machine.

Adafruit continues:  "The Firearms Policy Coalition flagged AB-2047 on X, and the reactions tell you everything.  Jon Lareau called it 'stupidity on steroids,' pointing out that a simple spring-shaped part has no way of revealing its intended use.  The Foundry put it plainly:  'Regulating general-purpose machines is another.  AB-2047 would require 3D printers to run state-approved surveillance software and criminalize modifying your own hardware.'"

Adafruit continues:  "As we've said before on this blog, when we covered Washington and New York, it doesn't matter if you're pro- or anti-gun.  The state should prosecute people who make illegal things, not add useless surveillance software to every tool in every classroom, library, and garage in the state.  And as you can see, these bills spread.  That's how a small group can push legislation into the entire country.  First, Washington proposed theirs, then New York, now California.  Once those three states pass a law, that's 20-25% of the country by GDP and population, and thus every manufacturer is forced to comply with a bad decision in order to stay in business.  If you're a maker, educator, or manufacturer anywhere in the U.S., even outside these states, this is a problem.  It's a problem now."

Adafruit's article mentioned Michael Weinberg.  Michael is the Executive Director of NYU's Engelberg Center for Innovation Law and Policy.  He's a board member of the Open Source Hardware Association and, as he describes himself, a maker of poorly made things.  He's also, however, an astute thinker.  And since I think this topic is extremely interesting and that our listeners are also likely to find it so, I wanted to also share what Michael wrote in the wake of the New York and Washington state bills.  The title of Michael's posting was:  "3D Printers Cannot Effectively Screen for Gun Parts."

He wrote:  "This post is a handy reference for the technical reasons why requiring 3D printers to screen for gun parts is not an effective way to reduce guns or gun violence. I am publishing it on the occasion of both New York and Washington State introducing bills to require this type of screening.  In addition to a topic I've been researching for over a decade, the question of how to know if a 3D printer is printing a gun part is something I've spent a lot of time working on while overseeing trust and safety at a large 3D printing service provider."  So consider that he's been overseeing trust and safety at a large 3D printing service provider where the question of what is it we are printing with our commercial grade machines, you know, comes up.

So he said:  "This post is not about debating the larger legitimacy of gun control.  In order to focus on the technical reasons why requiring 3D printers to identify and refuse to print gun parts does not work, it assumes that gun control is a reasonable and legitimate action of governments.  Broadly speaking, it's responding to requirements that all 3D printers check prints to make sure they're not gun parts.  If the part is a gun part, the printer would refuse to print it.  The short version is that accurately identifying gun parts is incredibly difficult, and the hackable nature of desktop 3D printers makes it trivial to circumvent any requirements to even try."

Here's the slightly longer version:  Matching files is fragile.  And anybody, you know, we've talked about hashes; right?  The whole point of a hash is that you want matching files to be fragile.  So this is working against you here.  He said:  "The first reason that requiring 3D printers to identify gun parts is ineffective is because analyzing 3D files is complicated.  Any attempt to identify gun parts will miss many parts that are actually for guns, and may flag a number of parts that have nothing to do with guns.  You know, they're just kind of gun-like.

"Expensive engineering design software is good at evaluating specific properties of a 3D file, like where mechanical stress will occur over a lifetime of use.  However, even that software cannot tell you what a part actually does.  Is that spring for a door, or a shock absorber, or a catapult?  This challenge is exacerbated by the fact that guns are just mechanical objects.  That means that there are many ways to design any individual part, and many individual parts of guns will resemble mechanical parts with totally benign uses.  Put another way, devoid of other context, a switch for a gun safety looks a lot like a switch for a door.

Broadly speaking, there are two ways to think about doing file matching.  Algorithmic analysis is one.  This approach imagines a piece of software that can analyze a file and determine with some level of certainty if it is a gun part or just a hinge. Assuming that this software exists, which it does not at the time of this writing, it is reasonable to expect that such an analysis would be reasonably computationally expensive.  3D printers do not have the on-board processing power to do this kind of analysis.  Requiring that they include chips capable of this kind of analysis would fundamentally change the economics of 3D printer design, akin to requiring that all bikes include jet engines."

I'll interrupt Michael for a moment to comment that he's not exaggerating how totally inadequate any 3D printer is for performing any sort of complex analysis.  3D printers are extremely simple and inexpensive.  I've owned a number of them.  They have nearly no brainpower themselves.  They're extremely simple robots that read instructions from a USB stick or SD card.  There are some that fix a liquid resin using an image, and others that move a plastic extruder around in 3-space, you know, basically saying "move the plastic extrusion head from where it is now to coordinates X, Y, and Z."  The resin-fix images, or the instructions with their coordinates, were created outside the printer by a real computer that's running some sort of engineering, drawing, design conversion software.

Once the design is ready, it's converted into fabrication instructions which are typically written to a storage device and then transferred to the standalone printer which simply follows the instructions step-by-step, without in any way understanding what it is that it's being asked to print.  That just isn't there.  So these printers are inexpensive, I mean, they're really inexpensive, you know, hundreds of dollars only because, you know, they could not be any more rudimentary.  They've just been stripped of anything that they don't need.

Michael continues, writing:  "Of course, the 3D printer could upload the file to a cloud somewhere and let the processing happen there.  However, Internet connectivity is not a default feature on desktop 3D printers.  You could require that all 3D printers maintain a constant connection to the Internet in order to operate; but again, that would fundamentally change how people use their printer.  There are also many legitimate use environments where constant Internet connectivity is neither possible nor desirable.  And, of course, we immediately think of this as, like, what about, you know, malware downloading itself into our 3D printers because they now have Internet connections.  It's like, no, please.  Let's not go there."  And he says:  "And of course this raises the question of who's responsible for maintaining that directory and keeping it secure."  Meaning in the cloud.

"So what about blacklisting?" he asks.  "If it's not possible to analyze the true purpose of each file, it might be possible to at least match them against a known database of gun parts; right?  This approach also has some serious shortcomings.  First, there's the question of keeping that database up to date on the printer.  That would require constant, or at least regular, Internet connectivity for the printer.  That raises the same issues as discussed in the last section.  Second, also as discussed above, analyzing and matching 3D files is computationally expensive.  The most logical way to do that with the processing power of a 3D printer would be to use a hash table of known gun parts, comparing a hash of the file to be printed against the table.

"The primary problem with both geometry matching and hash matching is that it's incredibly fragile.  The smallest change that had no impact on the functioning of the part, right, one bit changed, would completely change its hash, effectively hiding it from the blacklist.  That would make it trivial for anyone to circumvent.  Identifying which changes are functional and which are merely aesthetic is not easy.  That's especially true if people are making those changes with the specific goal of tricking the printer into printing a gun part."  You know, make a cosmetic change, change a tiny little thing, a little tick somewhere, and now it looks like an entirely different file because it's a completely different hash.  As we know, that's the nature of hashes.

He writes:  "3D printers print themselves:  The second reason this proposal is ineffective is because 3D printers are made in an incredibly distributed way.  There are dozens of ways to make your own 3D printer using open source, user-modifiable parts.  Even non-open source printers are highly hackable."  And the point he's making is you don't have - the only way to get one is not to buy one.  You can make one.  He says:  "As a result, there is no way to mandate that a technology that starts in a 3D printer remains in a 3D printer.  The software that runs most printers is open source, meaning a single update would circumvent any screening measures.

"This places 3D printers at the opposite end of the spectrum from 2D printers."  And this was interesting.  I hadn't thought about this before.  He wrote:  "Anti-counterfeit systems prevent 2D printers from printing currency.  To the extent that these rules are effective," he says, "(and I'm no expert, but they are often cited in these discussions as successful models)," he said, "it is because the 2D printing industry is fairly concentrated and proprietary.  2D printer companies are actively hostile to users who want to modify their products, significantly raising the barrier to hacking around any countermeasures.

"Desktop 3D printers are the opposite.  They all trace their heritage back to open source printers, and users expect to be able to modify, extend, and hack their own printers.  That means that workarounds for a screening mandate would be easy to develop, distribute, and implement.  Many open source software packages might even include the circumvention by default, meaning users would implement it without even actively intending to do so.

"3D printers are general purpose machines:  This post is focused on the technical challenges with requiring 3D printers to screen every file it prints for gun parts.  Nonetheless, it would be incomplete without a brief mention of how potentially invasive this sort of requirement is.  3D printers are general purpose machines that can be used for good or ill.  Just as we do not require the phone company to monitor every phone call in order to prevent customers from using phones to commit bank fraud, we should be wary of requiring our 3D printers to monitor every print in order to prevent one possible type of print.

"That type of invasion might be reasonable, if it was effective. However, for the reasons described, it is unlikely to prevent even a modestly motivated person from using their printer to create gun parts.  If an intervention is both highly invasive and unlikely to be effective, it's probably not an ideal policy."  Which I think is putting it mildly.

So I think Michael did a great job of detailing the specific 3D printing issues which would surround any attempt to manage or control what a 3D printer can and cannot print.  And while I have no interest in ever owning or printing a firearm, you know...

LEO:  There it is again.

STEVE:  Yeah.  Weird.  That sounded like a ground...

LEO:  It did, didn't it.

STEVE:  ...came and went.

LEO:  Like when you plug in a guitar to an amp, yeah.

STEVE:  Exactly that.  Anyway, I will...

LEO:  Continue, yeah.

STEVE:  Yeah.  While I have no interest in ever owning or printing a firearm, I'm a proud Californian, and I'm annoyed by the fact that the state I love is enacting such moronic legislation.  I mean, it isn't yet a law, but maybe the California Assembly is going to pass this.  It would be nuts.  But the broader concern is the large and growing degree to which modern technology appears to be outpacing legislators' ability to understand what they can and cannot have.  They cannot have a practical law, no matter how much they want one, to force 3D printers not to print gun parts.  They just can't; no matter, as I said, no matter how much they want it.  They also cannot have a law that absolutely preserves everyone's privacy while at the same time preventing child predators from abusing that privacy to commit their crimes.  We all wish it were possible to have both, but we know it's not.

I read some of the proposed new California Bill AB-2047.  It's really quite awful.  I have the link to the Bill's full text in the show notes for anyone who might be curious.  A bad law that hits the books can usually be challenged by those who have a vested interest in the preservation of the status quo.  But in the case of 3D printing, which is mostly a hobby interest, it's unclear who might have the deep pockets required to stand up against it and fight it out in court.  If that doesn't happen, it might be that the sale or transfer of 3D printers would be outlawed in those states which enact these dumb laws.  Here's just two lines from California's proposed legislation.

It says:  "The bill, beginning on March 1st, 2029, so that's, you know, next week, would prohibit the sale or transfer of three-dimensional printers that are not equipped with firearm blocking technology and that are not listed on the department's list of manufacturers with a certificate of compliance verification, except as specified.  The bill would authorize a civil action to be brought against a person who sells, offers to sell, or transfers a printer without the firearm blocking technology."

Okay, now, as I said, we're approaching March 1st, 2026.  So the purchase ban, if saner heads do not prevail, and it does come into effect, is still a full three years away, March 1st, 2029. This means that, no matter what, it will be possible for Californians to continue to purchase the 3D printer of their choice for the next three years.  If you live in an affected state, currently New York, Washington, or California, I don't know what the calendar states in the New York and Washington bills, but at least in California, if you've been thinking that you might like to explore 3D printing in your garage, you know, to print widgets of whatever sort, keep an eye on the date.  There may be a deadline coming for being able to do that, insane as that is.

LEO:  Yeah.  Impossible as it is.

STEVE:  Leo, it's just so wrong-headed.  It's like some, you know, some non-techie legislator heard that 3D printers, you know, people had 3D printers in their garage, and they were printing guns.  So it's like, oh, let's have a law that makes printers unwilling to do that.

LEO:  Right.  I mean, there is 3D gun printing going on.  They make those guns.

STEVE:  Yes.  Yes.  You know, we should have a law, Leo, that prevents resin from being willing to formed into that shape.

LEO:  Right.

STEVE:  How's that?

LEO:  That's the problem is it's not technically practical.

STEVE:  It's not possible; right.

LEO:  Luigi Mangione's gun was partially 3D printed, for example.  I mean, this has been an issue, but this isn't the solution, obviously.

STEVE:  Yeah.  And, I mean, I get it.  I get it; right.  I mean, I get it that printing a gun in a non-ferrous substance will then render, you know...

LEO:  Goes right through those machines, yeah.

STEVE:  ...ferrous material detectors; right.  They can no longer be, I mean, it's not a good thing.  But we're back in the same problem we've often talked about.  If crypto is made illegal, then only bad guys will use crypto.  If 3D printing is made illegal, then only bad guys will, I mean, will be using 3D printers to print guns.  And everybody else is...

LEO:  I understand the motivation.  The real issue is you can't do it technically.  As you point out, a spring is a spring.  It's not - it could be for a variety of purposes.  You can't really identify parts that are going into a gun.

STEVE:  And imagine the frustration of designing a particular widget, you know, to allow your baby carriage to roll better, and your printer says, oh, that looks like the barrel of a gun, sorry.  Can't print that.  It's like, what?

LEO:  Darren also points out you can't 3D print bullets.  They're still metal.  So you're going to be able to - you're going to see the ammunition, even if you...

STEVE:  Yeah, and actually there's been a lot of dialogue in the past about, okay, well, maybe we need to control ammunition because...

LEO:  That would be a better, more effective thing; right?

STEVE:  Yeah.

LEO:  Yeah.  Oh, well.  Commercial right now?

STEVE:  As would following the advice of this next sponsor, Leo, yes.

LEO:  Now, I want to kind of a little bit bring you into this because the next sponsor is Bitwarden, who we love, an open source solution.  And you're going to talk a little bit about this ETH Zurich finding about the risks of password managers if a bad guy could somehow get the vault; right?  

STEVE:  Yes.  That was one of the issues, too, is, I mean, we spent a lot of time looking at client-side vulnerabilities, like, you know, while the password manager is unlocked, if malware was on your computer, what could it do.  These guys did a very different thing.  They said, basically, if the cloud provider's entire server infrastructure was subverted, what could happen?

LEO:  Right.  

STEVE:  And you know, okay.

LEO:  We'll talk about it in a lot more detail, of course.

STEVE:  Yes, yes.

LEO:  Later.  I just wanted to bring it up because I was really impressed by Bitwarden's response, which is thank you for this research.  It's going to help us lock down what we do.  And this is one of the advantages of being an open source project is you welcome this kind of stuff.  And you have other eyes looking at the security.  And I don't think anybody should be worried whether you're a LastPass, Bitwarden, or a Dashlane user, about your security at this point.

STEVE:  In fact, I would be less worried today than you might have been a month ago.

LEO:  Right.

STEVE:  Because, you know, the whole point is these three just were deeply audited.

LEO:  Yeah, that's a good point.

STEVE:  I mean, and some of these hacks were wacky.  I mean, they were way out there.  It's like, well, okay.  I mean, and so if these three tools passed through this gauntlet, the other password managers haven't.

LEO:  Right.  Good point.

STEVE:  Because the researchers said, well, none of it's open source.  We can't invest in reverse engineering these closed products.

LEO:  Right.

STEVE:  So we're going to look at what we can.  And now we're way better for it.

LEO:  Fully open source, fully GPL open source.  You can inspect the source code.  So can ETH Zurich and everybody else, and I think that's really important.  The other thing I like about Bitwarden, our sponsor, is they enabled very early on this memory-hard key derivative function, Argon 2.  And this is another good solution; right?  I set my Argon 2 to the maximum number of iterations; and that really secures it, as well.  And so stay tuned because Steve will explain what that ETH Zurich report meant, and what it means to use it, Bitwarden users.  And I don't think we're afraid or switching.

STEVE:  No, I was never worried.

LEO:  Never worried.  On we go.

STEVE:  Friday before last, under the headline "Fintech lending giant Figure" - that's the name of the company, Figure Technology - "confirms data breach," TechCrunch reported:  "Figure Technology, a blockchain-based lending company, confirmed it experienced a data breach.  On Friday, Figure spokesperson Alethea Jadick told TechCrunch in a statement that the breach originated when an employee was tricked with a social engineering attack" - imagine that - "that allowed the hackers to steal 'a limited number of files.'"  I love that.  We'll get back to that in a second.  "The statement said the company is communicating 'with partners and those impacted,' and offering free credit monitoring 'to all individuals who receive a notice.'"

LEO:  Oh, thank you.

STEVE:  Oh, joy.  "Figure's spokesperson did not respond to a series of specific questions about the breach."  And this is, you know, from TechCrunch, a legitimate reporting group.  "The hacking group" - guess who - "ShinyHunters took responsibility for the hack on its official dark web leak website, saying that after the company refused to pay a ransom, they published 2.5GB of allegedly stolen data.  TechCrunch saw a portion of the data, which included customers' full names, home addresses, dates of birth, and phone numbers.  A member of ShinyHunters told TechCrunch" - notice that ShinyHunters is happy to talk to TechCrunch, but Figure Technology, no.  ShinyHunters told TechCrunch that "Figure was among the victims of a hacking campaign that targeted customers who rely on the single sign-on provider Okta.  Other victims of the campaign include Harvard University and the University of Pennsylvania (UPenn)."

Okay.  So first of all, I loved the quote from their spokesperson, "a limited number of files."  Right.  Who cares how many files escaped?  It's size that matters.

LEO:  Is it limited to one or a thousand or a million?  It's still limited; right?

STEVE:  Right.

LEO:  What does that mean?

STEVE:  Well, as they say, size matters.  In this case, 2.5GB of customer personal data can do plenty of damage, right, even if it's contained in one file.

LEO:  Right.

STEVE:  So all it takes is one.  Okay.  Then last Wednesday, Troy Hunt's Have I Been Pwned site scooped up the deliberately posted leaked breach data and examined what had been exposed.  967,200 - so nearly one million - of Figure Technology's customers - so first of all...

LEO:  It's a limited number of customers, Steve.  That's a limited number.

STEVE:  That is right.  It's not everybody on the planet.  Come on.  But Leo, I think you and I are in the wrong business.  A blockchain-based lending company has 967,200 customers?  What?  I don't even, you know, okay, fine, whatever.  They do.  Nearly a million customers, yes.  Of Figure Technology's customers, Troy's Have I Been Pwned site, they all, all 967,200, had their names, physical addresses, dates of birth, email addresses, and phone numbers released after Figure Technology refused to pay up.  Now, we know that not paying is the right thing for Figure to do; right?  I mean, you know, the "rightest" thing is not to get breached by an employee being tricked by ShinyHunters in the first place in a social engineering attack.  But if you've been breached, and you're being ransomed, not paying is the right thing to do.  But it makes you wonder what the ShinyHunters group themselves are thinking.

Now, presumably as a result of asking for too much money, they got nothing in return for their efforts; right?  The Figure Technology did the right thing, said no, and decided to just, you know, pay the price in reputational damage.  But as I've noted recently, ShinyHunters have zero interest in this data.  They don't care at all.  Its only value to them is the value that Figure may place on keeping it private.  And once Figure said "no deal," the ShinyHunters group had to release it, otherwise their threat to do so would be meaningless.

That means they're now unable to even resell the data since it's now freely available on the Internet.  And it needed to be made freely available in order for them to follow through on their threat that they would do that.  And we've seen reports that, in general, more victims now in the last year, compared to the last five years, are declining to take it on the chin, or rather deciding, sorry, they are deciding - they're declining to pay ransom, deciding to take it on the chin, and just saying no, sorry, we're not going to pay your ransom.  So I think partly this could be because these days being attacked and extorted is no longer a shocking announcement; right?  I mean, I skip over so many of these every week because they're just boring at this point.

Well, if they're boring to our listeners, they're boring to the world.  The world's just sort of like, okay, they got breached, and now they're being ransomed, and blah blah blah.  So it's just not - you don't need to pay the ransom to save face to the same degree.  And that also means that it is possible for them to recover from.  They just say "oops," they apologize to their affected customers, offer them, as we saw, a free year of credit monitoring, and then just get on with business as usual.  And as, you know, Leo, you and I both discovered that through no fault of ours, all of our data, including our Social Security numbers, was already out there swimming around in that big Internet ocean.

So ShinyHunters' failure to obtain anything of value suggests that perhaps the value of stolen data property is falling, and that if they don't wish to come up empty, as they just did here, they may need to drop the price of their "ask" because right now, you know, they're going through the trouble of doing this.  They're saying pay up or else.  And people are just more, way more often than before, saying no, we're not going to pay you.  We're just going to give our customers a year of free credit monitoring.  And of course what this tells us and our listeners is freeze your credit.  I mean, that's really what you want to do is get it frozen.

Last Wednesday, UpGuard posted a curious headline, and I mentioned this at the top.  Their headline was "Social Insecurity:  Billions of Social Security Numbers and Passwords."  That's all they said.  Their headline was sort of a fragmentary sentence, but okay.  Now, okay.  "Billions," that seems really bad; right?  But given that Social Security Numbers are, first of all, specific to the United States, whose current population is around 342 million, and that a grand total of around 450 million Social Security numbers have ever been issued since 1936, the claim of "2.7 billion" Social Security numbers seems somewhat sketchy.  But their posting explains what's going on, and it does seem legit because they're a legitimate security firm.

They said:  "The week of January 12th, 2026" - so, what, maybe six weeks ago - "the UpGuard Research team detected an exposed Elastic database with around three billion email addresses and passwords, and 2.7 billion records with Social Security numbers.  That amount of data suggests it was created by recombining prior Social Security number breaches, like the OPM breach in 2015 or [the one we're all aware of recently] the National Public Data breach in 2024."

They said:  "On the other hand, if even a fraction of the records were real" - if only 10%, or 270 million records, or even 1% were real - "the exposure would be a dire bellwether for the state of privacy in America."  And on this point I say, eh, you're getting to the party a little bit late.  Like I said, Leo and I were - our Social Security numbers and everybody else's are already out there.  And here was an Elastic database exposed with 2.7 billion Social Security numbers on it.  I think that probably is everybody several times over.

They said:  "With the help of some unfortunate friends, we were able to confirm that at least some of it was real.  And with the help of K-pop and some American presidents, we were able to approximate when the passwords were collected."  Okay.

"While most exposed databases require investigation to determine if they contain sensitive data, this one was obvious.  The database had one index named 'ssn'" - oh, good, so you can look it up by Social Security number - "and another named 'ssn2,' each containing millions of records with nine-digit numbers in a field labeled 'ssn.'"  What could that be?  "The database also had several indices that were collections of emails and associated passwords.  On January 16th, we submitted the IP address and explanation of the issue to the FBI's IC3.  We also submitted an abuse report to Hetzner, the hosting company.  They replied, saying they would forward the issue to the customer.  After we clarified that their customer was in gross violation of privacy laws, all public access to the database was removed on January 21st.

"Hetzner replied once more:  'Dear Sir or Madam.  Thank you for your report.  This is our customer's statement.'"  And then they quote their customer's response:  "'Hello.  We contacted our client and explained what ssn database'" - actually it does say what.  "We explained what ssn database hosting not acceptable.  Client now deleted this file from server.  So problem solver for now.'"

LEO:  English is not their native language, I would assume.

STEVE:  Okay.  UpGuard's report continues.  Anyway, I'm not going to go into it.  They poke around inside their database.  Apparently they got a copy of it because they did a lot of, like, research.  They poked around, locating some people they know closely enough to confirm their Social Security numbers. The data is authentic.  Unfortunately, since one of them whose data is present in the data happened to also have had her identity stolen in the past, they drew, these researchers, the entirely unwarranted conclusion that this means that this breach was the source of the identity theft.  No.  Or unlikely, at least.  We know there's really not much personally identifiable information that is NOT by now loose on the Internet and available online.

I wanted to share this specific story to drive home the point that there has been so much prior leakage of our personal data that we really have very little to no control over it any longer.  That's all just an illusion.  It's certainly the case that the use of services like one of TWiT's sponsors, DeleteMe, makes a lot of sense for anyone who wishes to be as proactive as possible.  But my feeling is that, beyond that, doing everything that's within our power to minimize the impact of the use of any personal data loss of ours that has almost certainly already occurred is what makes the most sense.

These guys did recognize that the database appeared to contain a great deal of redundancy and also a fair amount of incorrect noise.  So it wasn't the highest quality, which is what we'd assume when we learn that it was 2.7 billion records containing Social Security numbers, when only 450 million have ever been issued since 1936 in the entire history of Social Security.  At this point, protecting ourselves is the best we can do.  I assumed that the GRC shortcut I would have previously created years ago would be GRC.sc/credit.  And, sure enough, that bounced me directly to the Investopedia page which talks about freezing credit and provides the links to the three main credit freeze pages of the three main credit bureaus.

Any time you are not actively needing to have your credit queried because you're applying for credit or purchasing something or whatever, the best advice that exists is to keep it frozen because the sad truth is all of our data is loose.  It's out there as a consequence of previous irresponsibility on the part of entities that we gave it to, including the credit bureaus.

LEO:  You know, I think there are only a billion possible, am I right, Social Security numbers?  How many... 

STEVE:  You're right, nine digits.  So, yeah.

LEO:  So they got them all.  The problem is, if you don't have a name associated with it, it's just a number.

STEVE:  That's a very good point, Leo.  Start at 000-000-0000...

LEO:  I know them all.  I know every single Social Security number.  Every one of them.

STEVE:  You do.

LEO:  I just don't know whose they are.

STEVE:  You brute forcer, you.

LEO:  Oh, lord.

STEVE:  Okay.  So just a quickie.  Apple watcher and insider Mark Gurman has reported that Apple is believed to be working on a smart pendant, smart glasses, and new AI-based AirPods.  And that all products will be equipped with a camera that will feed data into an AI system.  And I'm sure you're up on this ore than I am, Leo, since you spend a lot of time over with your Mac guys.

LEO:  As long as it doesn't feed it to Siri, I'm okay.

STEVE:  Well, apparently, he said, it's unclear what the AI will be doing for its user.  And it does seem like a strange thing for Apple to be doing since people almost universally object to being surreptitiously recorded.  You know, I loved listening to Alex when he realizes some guy he's been talking to for half an hour was, like, you know, had a camera in his glasses.  And he said, "Hey, you, are you recording this?"  The guy said, "Well, yeah, of course."

LEO:  I think Apple recognizes that this is just going to be the next thing, and everybody's going to do it.  And they need to develop it.  And then I think their hope is that people will trust Apple to keep it private.

STEVE:  Of any company out there, as I said.  And boy, it was also, just as an aside, it was nice to hear you guys on MacBreak talking about, as I had been saying, how frustrating it is with Apple's upselling.  And it just...

LEO:  Everybody does it now.

STEVE:  Yes, you're right, it is, it's everybody.  And the problem is some percentage of people it works on.

LEO:  Oh, it works, yeah.

STEVE:  And encouraged everybody else to do it.  Okay...

LEO:  They turned into Amazon.

STEVE:  Anyone who has continued to use Firefox on a Windows 7 or 8 machine will no longer receive security updates after this month.  This month is it.  Firefox support for the browser itself officially ended three years ago, you know, in terms of monthly updates or occasional updates to the browser itself.  That was in January of 2023.  But security fixes have continued to be provided.  Those end now, this month.  With the end of this month, that's it for Firefox.  So that's good.  It's good that I'm leaving Windows 7 and Firefox on I think it's like version 115 ESR is the...

LEO:  We're up to 145 now.  By the way, good news, they've added a switch in 145 that says "Disable all AI features."  Click that switch, you're golden.

STEVE:  Nice.

LEO:  They were smart.  I think that they listened to their customers on that one.

STEVE:  Yeah.  And of course I think it was, I'm sure it was, it was Vivaldi who made a marketing point, saying we're not doing AI, period.

LEO:  Right.  That's right.

STEVE:  And then they said, well, until it shows its value.  It's like, oh, okay, fine.

LEO:  I'm sorry, 148, thank you, David.  David in our Twitch says it's 148, that's the one just came out today with the No AI switch.

STEVE:  Wow.  Roskomnadzor, our favorite Russian group, apparently got a bit trigger happy recently.  As part of its recent accelerated Internet crackdown, which we've been talking about the last couple weeks, this time it appears that Russia's Internet watchdog blocked the official website of the Linux kernel.  The block was quickly lifted after upset Russian IT engineers reminded Roskomnadzor that all of the country's native OS distros run on Linux.  So, yep, can't disconnect from that one, guys.  They're going to have to - even if they do disconnect from the Internet, they're going to have to have a little backdoor there where they're still able to be in touch with Linux.org, apparently.

So, oh, Leo.  This raised - if it wasn't Reuters, I would wonder.  "WASHINGTON, Feb 18 (Reuters) - The U.S. State Department is developing an online portal that will enable people in Europe and elsewhere to see content banned by their governments, including alleged hate speech and terrorist propaganda, a move Washington views as a way to counter European censorship, three sources familiar with the plan said."

Okay, so, what?  Triple-sourced reporting says that the U.S. is planning to do what, exactly?  Yes.  And that, Leo, move your cursor over that blurred out area.  Oh, yeah, there we go.

LEO:  Freedom is coming, and there's Paul Revere bringing freedom to those poor unfree people in France and Germany.

STEVE:  So, yes.  Freedom.gov.

LEO:  Oh, my god.

STEVE:  So I get this.  You get this.  I'm wondering what our listeners in the U.K., we know we have a bunch of them, wonder what they're going to see.

LEO:  This is going to be an X feed; isn't it.  That's what it's going to be.

STEVE:  Essentially that's what we're talking about.  So here's what Reuters reported last Wednesday.  They said:  "The site will be hosted at Freedom.gov.  One source said officials had discussed including a virtual private network function to make a user's traffic appear to originate in the U.S., and added that user activity on the site will not be tracked.  Headed by Undersecretary for Public Diplomacy Sarah Rogers, the project was expected to be unveiled at last week's Munich Security Conference, but was delayed, the sources said."  Again, triply sourced reporting.  "Reuters could not determine why the launch did not happen, but some State Department officials, including attorneys, have raised concerns about the plan [imagine that], two of the sources said, without detailing what those concerns were.

"The project could further strain ties between the Trump administration and traditional U.S. allies in Europe, already heightened by disputes over trade, Russia's war with Ukraine, and President Donald Trump's push to assert control over Greenland.  The portal could also put Washington in the unfamiliar position of appearing to encourage citizens to flout local laws.  In a statement to Reuters, a State Department spokesperson said the U.S. government does not have a censorship-circumvention program specific to Europe, but added:  'Digital freedom is a priority for the State Department, however, and that includes the proliferation of privacy and censorship-circumvention technologies like VPNs.'

"The spokesperson denied any announcement had been delayed and said it was inaccurate that State Department attorneys had raised concerns."  Despite, again, triply sourced reporting.  I think that one was dual sourced.  The Trump administration has made free speech, particularly what it sees as the stifling of conservative voices online, a focus of its foreign policy including in Europe and Brazil.  Europe's approach to free speech differs from the U.S., where the Constitution protects virtually all expression."  Uh-huh.

"The European Union's limits grew from efforts to fight any resurgence of extremist propaganda that fueled Nazism, including its vilification of Jews, foreigners, and minorities.  U.S. officials have denounced EU policies who they say are suppressing right-wing politicians, including in Romania, Germany and France, and have claimed rules like the EU's Digital Services Act and Britain's Online Safety Act limit free speech.

"The EU delegation in Washington, which acts like an embassy for the 27-country bloc, did not immediately respond to a request for comment about the U.S. plan.  In rules that fall most heavily on social media sites and large platforms like Meta's, Facebook, and X, the EU restricts the availability - and in some cases requires rapid removal - of content classified as illegal hate speech, terrorist propaganda, or harmful disinformation under a group of rules, laws, and decisions since 2008."

Rogers, the person we spoke of before, of the State Department, "has emerged as an outspoken advocate of the Trump administration position on EU content policies.  She has visited more than half a dozen European countries since taking office in October and met with representatives of right-wing groups that the administration says are being oppressed.  The department did not make Rogers available for an interview to Reuters.

"In a National Security Strategy published in December, the Trump administration warned that Europe faced 'civilizational erasure' because of its migration policies.  It said the U.S. would prioritize 'cultivating resistance to Europe's current trajectory within European nations.'  EU regulators regularly require U.S.-based sites to remove content and can impose bans as a measure of last resort.  X, which is owned by Trump ally Elon Musk, was hit with a 120 million-euro fine in December for noncompliance."

On the other hand, last week we talked about how $2.2 billion of the $2.4 billion euros that had been fined remained unpaid.  Anyway, it's going to be interesting to see what happens next.  As I said, the site does not currently show me what's described.  There was some language in their reporting that suggested that what you and I see, Leo, is not what Europeans see currently.  So I'm sure that our listeners will let us know when they see this.  I don't know what to make of this.  I guess we'll follow it and see.

LEO:  I just love it that they're spending my tax dollars on such important initiatives.  By the way, they killed Radio Free Europe.

STEVE:  I was going to say, that had occurred to me also.  It's like, wait a minute.

LEO:  This is in lieu of...

STEVE:  Okay.  So I hope I don't need to tell anyone listening not to ever, ever use an LLM to directly generate a password.  In other words, never ask an LLM for a password.  Never say: "Could you please generate a highly secure long password with 20 characters of all kinds including a mixture of upper and lowercase alphabetic, numbers, and special characters?"  No. Don't do that.

LEO:  Oh.  It seems like such a good idea.

STEVE:  You'll get one.  It'll look wonderfully strong.  But the LLM is quite likely to give the same password to others.  Because this is not what they're for.  We've spent so much time through the years on this podcast examining just how very difficult it is to actually generate and obtain high-quality passwords.  I even have a page on GRC, GRC.com/passwords, that is very popular, that does this, because it's difficult.  So the idea of asking a parrot for a password is almost painfully bad.

LEO:  Monkey123.  Monkey123.  Everybody use Monkey123.

STEVE:  Having apparently run out of useful things to explore, the site "Irregular" - that's the name of the site - they did a detailed in-depth exploration of Large Language Model password generation under the headline:  "Vibe Password Generation: Predictable by Design."  Well, at least they got the headline right.

Okay.  So this is so nuts that I'm not going to spend much time on it.  Their posting is long, and they've got charts and graphs and stats and blah blah blah.  But they were kind enough to give us an executive summary at the beginning.  They wrote:  "LLM-generated passwords" - which, you know, should be just outlawed, an oxymoron - "generated directly by the LLM, rather than by an agent using a tool..."

LEO:  That's key, by the way, that clause.

STEVE:  Yes.  Generated, exactly, by the agent rather than using a tool, "appear strong, but are fundamentally insecure because LLMs are designed to predict tokens, the opposite of securely and uniformly sampling of random characters."

LEO:  Exact opposite.

STEVE:  Yeah, the exact opposite.  "Despite this, LLM-generated passwords appear in the real world, used by real users, and invisibly chosen by coding agents as part of code development tasks, instead of relying on traditional secure password generation methods."  So think about that.  You vibe code something, and part of that is the need to generate a password.  And the LLM says, oh, here's a password, and plugs it into your code somewhere deep.

They said:  "We've tested state-of-the-art models and agents, and analyzed the strength of the passwords they generate.  Our results include predictable patterns in password characters, repeated passwords, and passwords that are much weaker than they seem, as described in detail in this publication.  We recommend that users avoid using passwords generated by LLMs, that developers direct coding agents to use secure password generation methods when needed" - have them come to GRC.com/passwords - "and that AI labs train their models and direct their coding agents to prefer secure password generation out of the box."  And what I loved, somewhere down in the text, Leo, it actually, I mean, it talked about how - I know no one of our listeners would do this.  But think about the common Joe.

LEO:  Exactly.  It seems like a good idea.

STEVE:  They're chatting to ChatGPT, and they say, hey, you know, I'm trying to log into this site, and it keeps complaining about the passwords I'm using.  Could you give me, you know, a good long strong password?  And it'll probably say yeah, here you go.  Does it?

LEO:  Of course it will, yes.

STEVE:  Yup.

LEO:  But, and that's the thing is that it's a kind of naive - and I understand, I mean, oh, yes, the computer's going to generate a really good password.  It's smart.

STEVE:  Oh, Leo, it's artificial intelligence.

LEO:  What could possibly go wrong?

STEVE:  Probably it's generative.  It's going to generate.  That's what generators do.

LEO:  It would actually be fairly trivial, I can write it right now in Claude and say, "I would like a strong password.  Go to GRC.com/passwords and get one."  And it would use your code to generate the password, and it would be a good password.  I mean, that's probably preferable to saying "Write a Python script that will generate a true random password."

STEVE:  It's very difficult.

LEO:  Using entropy that you get from - it's hard to do.  It's hard to do.  Let Steve do it.  And, I mean, you could, you know, you could do it.  But actually it would be trivial to say just go and get it from GRC.com/passwords.  The problem is that most people are using chatbots.  They're using - and they're just going to ask it and think, oh, it's smart.

STEVE:  Yes, they're just going to ask it.  You know, this website needs me to give it a long password.  What do you recommend?

LEO:  Right.  What do you do for entropy in your password generator?

STEVE:  I've got an algorithm that's been running for 10 years or something, which uses crypto in order to roll passwords forward.

LEO:  Okay, yeah.  So I'm just going to - let's just see.  I'm going to ask Claude Code to go out, can you fetch me a strong password from GRC.com/passwords.  And presumably it's going to actually run your page because it can do that, it can control a browser.  And there you go.  Here are fresh passwords from GRC's Perfect Password, Skip.  He calls me Skip because it's my buddy.  And this is exactly the format you would get; right?  These are legit.  This is not...

STEVE:  And nobody will ever get those again, although now you don't want to use those, having shown them.  But aside from that...

LEO:  By the way, it's smart.  Look, it says, "GRC regenerates these on every page load.  So these are unique to this fetch.  For a fresh set, just ask again.  Or visit the site directly."  That's the intelligent way to use it.  But I understand why, you know, naive users are just going to say, well, it's smart.

STEVE:  Yeah, they're just going to say it's AI, yeah.

LEO:  It's AI.  It's AI.

STEVE:  It's smarter than I am, so just give me a password.

LEO:  Right, right, right.

STEVE:  Don't do that.  Okay.  I've been saying recently that the technique of asking a user to authenticate themselves by what they think is a CAPTCHA, where they're instructed to press the Windows+R key to open the Windows Run dialog, then press CTRL+V to paste, followed by the ENTER key, is terrifying because it is so powerful and potent and because I could see so many people falling for it because, just like asking ChatGPT for a password, most people have very little idea how their computers actually operate.  So they just follow instructions; right?  They're following instructions in order to just get by.

LEO:  It's all an incantation for them.

STEVE:  Yes.

LEO:  They don't understand.

STEVE:  Yes.  So this highly potent form of attack has been dubbed "ClickFix."  It's called the ClickFix attack.  Recall that I recently shared exactly such a pop-up that one of our listeners had encountered and emailed to me, saying "I didn't do this, but I wanted to show it to you, Steve."  And that sent me off on a rant about how irresponsible I felt Microsoft was being about not tracking the source of anything pasted into the system's global clipboard.

LEO:  Uh-oh.

STEVE:  A web browser is a very clear security boundary with all manner of creepy crawly things clamoring to escape from it.  So it should be utterly impossible for automation in the browser to place anything onto the system's global clipboard that can then be pasted outside the browser's security perimeter, especially into the Windows Run dialog.  Seeing how obviously dangerous and effective this form of attack promised to be, I wasn't surprised to read the report that Huntress Labs published one week ago, last Tuesday.

Huntress set the stage for their lengthy report, and I'll just share the beginning.  They wrote:  "Columbia, Maryland - February 17th, 2026 - Cybercrime has become the world's third-largest economy, with costs projected to reach $12.2 trillion annually by 2031.  Today, Huntress exposes the tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) fueling this multi-trillion-dollar illicit market in its 2026 Cyber Threat Report.  The in-depth analysis sheds light on the playbook used by organized, profit-driven cybercriminals, uncovering how they weaponize legitimate tools, exploit everyday behaviors, and leverage a vast underground network to exploit people, businesses, and employees across the globe.

"To produce this report, Huntress analyzed proprietary telemetry from over four million endpoints and nine million identities across the 230,000-plus organizations it protects worldwide.  So again, Huntress has instrumentation on over four million endpoints, nine million identities, within 230,000, more than 230,000 organizations that are under its protection as part of its services."  They said:  "This robust dataset served as the foundation for uncovering critical insights into the evolving ransomware ecosystem, shifting adversary tradecraft, and actionable strategies to help organizations prepare for the year ahead."  Okay.  So that's where this all came from.

Under the topic of "Key Findings," the item that caught my eye was this.  They wrote:  "Over half of all malware loader activity came from ClickFix."  Hear that?  Over half of all malware loader activity came from that single exploit, the CAPTCHA, the fake CAPTCHA that tells people who don't know how to use a computer or what they're doing, but follow instructions, to press, you know, thank you very much, to continue authenticating, press the Windows+R key, press CTRL+V, press ENTER.  Over half of all malware loader activity.

They wrote:  "In 2025, attackers did not need to break in when they could just trick users into giving them access.  No technique did this more effectively than ClickFix, which fueled 53% of all malware loader activity.  By masquerading as routine tasks, like solving a CAPTCHA, ClickFix and its variants tricked users into becoming unwitting accomplices, facilitating the silent installation of infostealers, ransomware, and remote access tools."

So I've specifically and explicitly reached out to many of my friends to warn them of this attack because it's so obvious to me that it's going to happen.  It's just it's too diabolical and too likely to succeed.  One of my friends who works for a very large non-profit charitable organization receives regular employee-level security training as part of her role.  When I told her about this, she commented that they had never been warned about this type of attack.  There's likely a delay between the growth of an attack and its inclusion into a training program.  But that leaves a very dangerous gap; and as Huntress found from their analysis, 53% of all successful breaches that occurred during 2025 were attributable to the success of just this one class of attacks.

